418
Chapter 11
Written Reports and Verbal Briefings
Bottom Line Up Front
Written reports and verbal briefings in security analysis are meant to both inform
and persuade customers and larger audiences. There are no standard formats for
these reports and briefings. There are; however, some general guidelines for
preparing reports and briefings. Most intelligence reports and briefings include a
title, key judgments, detailed arguments, outlooks, and implication assessments.
Security policy analysis reports and briefings are similar to those in intelligence,
but include recommendations and often an initial implementation plan for solving
the problem under study. Once an initial draft of a report or briefing is completed,
it should be submitted to a review process consisting of a structured self-critique
that looks deeper at the key judgments; then, a self-review of the draft report or
briefing using critical-thinking Intellectual Standards. For intelligence written
reports, a more formal, external Devil’s Advocacy challenge review is required.
A Different Approach
Security analysis written reports and verbal briefings likely differ from how
analysts developed such material in the past. In elementary school, secondary
school, and even college, most students are taught a general humanities writing
approach: organize and present the information and then lead the reader or
listener to a final conclusion. This is not how security analysis reports and
briefings are formatted. Academics using the scientific method may prepare
reports with sections for a literature review, theoretical framework, research
design, hypothesis tests, analysis, findings, and conclusions. Security reports and 
419
briefings are formatted differently than those in academia. Many of the skills
learned from research and analysis at all levels in academia are important to
preparing security analysis reports and briefings, such as information searching,
logic employment, punctuation, spelling, grammar, sentence construction, and
paragraph construction.
Similar to journalistic stories, security analysis reports are prepared with
the most important material presented first; that is, by addressing who, what,
where, when, and how of the situation. Later in the journalist’s story, they present
more detailed supporting evidence and reasoning. This journalistic formatting is
due to two main factors. First, some customers will only “speed read” headlines
and initial paragraphs or quickly listen to verbal story leads. Thus, the main points
must be presented at the start. Busy customers often look to catchy headlines
and the first few written paragraphs or lead statements of a story to “grab” their
attention and convey the gist of the story—without reading or listening to the
entire story. Second, editors for media written and verbal stories cut material
from the bottom-up to fit existing page and column constraints or time allotted
for verbal stories. Security analysis written reports and verbal briefings start with
their findings followed by the evidence and reasoning that supported the findings.
There is no one format; however, for developing security analysis written
reports and verbal briefings. Some will be written only, some verbal only, and
some will require both written and verbal reports. Written reports range from
one or two pages to hundreds of pages and may be published in a variety of
locations. Verbal briefings normally focus on a single customer and related
audience. Live or recorded video briefings also may be given and posted on the
Internet. Written reports and verbal briefing formats will depend on the issue or
development for the analysis (i.e., the questions being answered and/or problem
being addressed), the primary customer or audience for the analysis, and the style
guide for their home organization. Some reports and briefings, especially tactical
or current-event reporting, may provide only one to three pages of written text or
a few briefing slides. Other reports and briefings may take 10-20 pages of written 
420
text or 20 or so briefing slides. Still other reports and briefings may require 50-100
pages or more of written text, but still with 20 or so briefing slides, as long verbal
briefings may lose the audience.
The content and format for written reports and verbal briefings must be
tailored for the customer and audience. Some customers or audiences may be
new to the security field or specific event or development under analysis and may
require more background and descriptive details. Other customers or audiences
may be experienced and will need less descriptive details and require only the
analytic insights. Many large security organizations publish a formal style guide
for formatting written reports. Academic programs will use one of the standard
academic style manuals (American Psychological Association, Chicago/Turabian,
Modern Languages Association, etc.). Do not expect to find pre-formatted report
templates where the analyst just fills in the blanks.
The analyst’s ultimate challenge is to inform and persuade the customer
and audience about the event or development under analysis. In their reports and
briefings, analysts must persuade the readers or listeners of the efficacy of the
analytic findings. The message conveyed must be simple, concrete, and credible.
Having first completed a good critical-thinking analysis makes report and briefing
development easier. Reports and briefings are only prepared after the criticalthinking analysis is complete. As the reports and briefings are in development and
review, the analyst likely will find gaps in the analysis and will have to revisit one
or more of the critical-thinking elements of thought. While there is no single
format for preparing security analysis reports and briefings, this chapter provides
general guidance for their drafting. This guidance is largely standard in the
security field. This chapter also presents the process for conducting structured
self-critiques, self-reviews, and challenge analyses before written reports and
verbal briefings are published or presented to customers. Lastly, do not be
surprised; however, if some readers or listeners initially are skeptical or even
hostile toward the findings.
421
Getting Started: Title and BLUF
The first item anyone notices in a written report or verbal briefing is the title. Use
the title to catch the customer or audience’s attention from the start. It must also
convey an analytic message,
1 by providing the “who, what, and so what” of the
written report or verbal briefing.
2 The title must convey who the key actor(s)
is/are in the analysis and should include an action verb to highlight the event or
development addressed in the written report or verbal briefing. The action verb
usually is followed by a few words to state the “so what” of the analysis; that is,
indicate why it is important the reader or listener pay attention to the written
report or verbal briefing. Be as specific as possible in the title without using too
many words. Avoid using sub-titles or supporting clauses in titles. Also remember
that the title may be the main focus of key word searches, so think about how
other analysts may search to find the written reports or recorded verbal briefings.
Examples of titles include:
Weak: Assessing North Korean Nuclear Weapons Developments
Better: North Korea Fields Nuclear Missiles with Reach to U.S. Pacific Coast

Weak: Colombian Cocaine Supply Increases
Better: Colombian Cocaine Supply May Double Illegal Drugs in the United
States
At the start of the written report or verbal briefing, provide a contention or
summary of the analytic message. The contention may be a thesis, key judgments,
findings, conclusions, recommendations, or a combination of these items. The
contention is not the question(s) being answered by the analysis. It is also not the
hypotheses tested in the analysis. Placing the contention at the start of the
written report or verbal briefing is referred to as providing the bottom-line-upfront or BLUF.
3 After a catchy title, the BLUF is the next item customers should 
422
see in security analysis written reports or verbal briefings. Prepare the BLUF after
developing the main arguments that support the contention.
 BLUF statements depend on the type of written report or verbal briefing
and length of the analysis. In verbal briefings, the BLUF should follow directly
after the title slide. In shorter written reports, the BLUF should be in the first or
second paragraph and often is included as part of the introduction. In longer
written reports, the BLUF likely will be a separate initial section labeled the
Executive Summary4 and could run a page or two in 10- to 20-page reports or
several pages in 50- to 100-page or longer reports. The executive summary is
similar to an abstract in academic writing, but with a different focus of
summarizing the content and contentions of the entire report in a short space for
busy customers.
Box 11.1 provides an example of a short BLUF excerpt from the
introduction to Congressional testimony by the Director of National Intelligence
on the 2018 “Worldwide Threat Assessment.” Examples of longer BLUF
statements, normally in executive summaries, may be accessed by reviewing
studies published by the U.S. Government Accountability Office5 or Congressional
Research Service.
6
Box 11.1 BLUF Example7
Competition among countries will increase in the coming year as major powers
and regional aggressors exploit complex global trends while adjusting to new
priorities in US foreign policy. The risk of interstate conflict, including among
great powers, is higher than at any time since the end of the Cold War. The
most immediate threats of regional interstate conflict in the next year come
from North Korea and from Saudi-Iranian use of proxies in their rivalry. At the
same time, the threat of state and non-state use of weapons of mass
destruction will continue to grow….
423
Tension within many countries will rise, and the threat from Sunni violent
extremist groups will evolve as they recoup after battlefield losses in the Middle
East….
 ODNI 2018 “Worldwide Threat Assessment”
Depending on the type of written report or verbal briefing, the BLUF may
be supported in the same section by additional information. This is especially true
in executive summaries. The purpose or question(s) for the analysis are usually
part of the BLUF. Further, the BLUF should make clear if the report or briefing is in
response to a specific customer request, part of other formal analytic tasking, or
as the result of a current event or recent development. The BLUF also may be
supported by important background or contextual information, especially when
the background or context clarifies the linkage between the purpose of the report
and contentions. Providing the basics of who, what, where, when, and how of the
situation also may be appropriate in a longer BLUF. The most important factor to
remember is that busy decision makers may only read the BLUF. Think of the
BLUF in shorter written reports as the “30-second elevator talk,” which conveys
the purpose, main findings, and key information to the customer in the shortest
time. A good BLUF should entice the reader or listener to want to learn more from
the longer written report or verbal briefing.
Building the Argument
A good argument makes up the main body of a report or briefing. As with other
types of professional or academic documents, drafting a security analysis written
report or verbal briefing should start with an outline. The objective of the outline
is to “…create a roadmap for writing [the]…paper down to the paragraph level.”8
Security analysis written reports or verbal briefings employ a top-down “pyramid”
approach as depicted in Figure 11.1.9 This approach calls first for the title and 
424
BLUF, which are followed by the argument or main body of the report providing
detailed reasons, evidence, and objections that support the BLUF.
The argument supports the contentions of the analysis. This includes the
evidence, reasons, and objections that also support each analytic finding. The
first sentence of each new argument point should be an analytic finding. Each
argument point could be one paragraph or a series of paragraphs, with all
argument paragraphs starting with an analytic insight or finding. An argument is
organized in priority order, with the most important analytic finding provided
first, followed by the other analytic findings in descending order of importance.
Major objections to the analytic findings and rebuttals to those objections also
are important components of the argument section. This recommended format
follows the logical argumentation outline presented in Chapter 9.
Finishing Touches
After the title, BLUF, and argument of a written report or verbal briefing comes
the finishing touches, which are items complementing or enhancing the 
425
argument or main body of the report or briefing. In security analysis, these
finishing touches should answer questions the reader or listener may have about
the BLUF and arguments. Most written reports do not require a formal conclusion
because the BLUF provided at the beginning summarizes the results of the
analysis. There are some items; however, that may need to be provided later in a
written report to support the BLUF and arguments. If the project’s purpose or
question(s) did not specifically call for a predictive (what will happen?) analysis, it
may be helpful to include an outlook discussion that highlights what to expect
next in the event or development. If a “what next” analysis was part of the BLUF
and arguments, then an outlook is not required. Also, if not addressed in the BLUF
or arguments, the implications and/or consequences of the analysis concerning
the contentions about the event or development also may be included near the
end of a written report or verbal briefing. See Chapter 10 for specifics on
developing implications and consequences. In a security policy analysis report or
briefing, there should be a summary of the initial implementation plan for the
recommendations, including any anticipated resistance to the recommendations.
See Chapter 10 for details.
One item that must be in all intelligence analysis reports and briefings, and
also may be appropriate for security policy reports and briefings, is the analyst’s
determination of the uncertainty associated with the analytic results. This
uncertainty usually is expressed in terms of likelihood and confidence levels.
Likelihood focuses on the likely occurrence of the explanation for an event or
development, likelihood of any predictions about the event or development, or
likelihood of the report’s recommendations to solve the problem addressed.
Confidence levels capture the analyst’s assessment of the quality of their overall
analysis. In addition to the analyst’s estimates of likelihood and confidence levels,
the written report or verbal briefing must indicate the causes of the uncertainty
(information, sources, assumptions, models, etc.). The differences between
likelihood and confidence levels often confuse readers or listeners; to avoid this,
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) cautions that analysts 
426
“must not combine a confidence level and a degree of likelihood…in the same
sentence.”10
Likelihood, which refers to the analyzed actor’s past or future behaviors in
an event or development, may be expressed in statements, probabilities (either in
words or numbers), or other likelihood measures such as odds (1 chance out of 5,
2 chances out of 3, etc.). The main factor in determining likelihood is the analyst’s
subjective estimate of how likely the event or development being explained or
predicted did or will occur. Remember when analyzing human behavior, the world
is probabilistic and not deterministic. This means while a human target may have
acted one way in the past, or an event or development unfolded one way in the
past, does not mean the same behaviors will be identical in the future; so,
behavior tends to be very probabilistic. In order to standardize how likelihood and
probability are expressed in intelligence reports and briefings, the ODNI provides
the guidance summarized in Figure 11.2.
Figure 11.2 Expressing Likelihood and Probability11
almost no
chance
very
unlikely
unlikely roughly
even
chance
likely very likely almost
certain
remote highly
improbable
improbable
(improbably)
roughly
even odds
probable
(probably)
highly
probable
nearly
certain
01-05% 05-20% 20-45% 45-55% 55-80% 80-95% 95-99%

Confidence levels are the analyst’s subjective assessment of the quality of
their judgments. Analysts therefore must reflect on the quality of their
information, sources, information gaps, assumptions, models, and analytic
methods to determine their overall confidence in the report’s findings. For
confidence level assessments in quantitative studies, the analyst should consider
the statistical significance (p-value) of the computational results. The statistical
significance is expressed as numeric probabilities (0 (least) to 1.0 (most)). In the
social sciences (including security analysis), a statistical significance of .05 is
normally the standard, indicating the results would be accepted but could still be 
427
wrong in 1 out of 20 cases. This also means the results are likely correct 19 out of
20 times or a 95% or high confidence level. Comparative analyses employ a
benchmark proportion assessment—simply indicating the percentage of cases
studied meeting the analytic findings. In qualitative analysis, there are no
statistical or mathematical measures to assist in determining confidence levels, so
the analyst must rely on a subjective estimate. The final confidence levels usually
are stated as low, moderate, or high. Figure 11.3 provides the definitions of
confidence levels used in the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Figure 11.3 Department of Homeland Security Confidence Levels12
High Confidence generally indicates that judgments are based on high-quality
information from multiple sources or from a single, highly reliable source, and/or
that the nature of the issue makes it possible to render a solid judgment.
Moderate Confidence generally means that the information is credibly sourced
and plausible, but can be interpreted in various ways, or is not of sufficient
quality or corroborated sufficiently to warrant a higher level of confidence.
Low Confidence generally mean that the information’s credibility and/or
plausibility is questionable, the information is too fragmented or poorly
corroborated to make solid analytic inferences, or there are significant concerns
or problems with the sources.
Finally, security analysis written reports usually provide one or more
supporting appendixes. The appendixes may include a number of different types
of information to include historical or background material, organizational
information on actors in the analysis, details on information sources, worksheets
or results of the analytic methodology, technical or scientific information, or any
additional supporting or peripheral information the reader may reference to
better understand the report.13 Information is placed in appendixes to not
overburden the BLUF or argument sections of the report. Chronologies of the 
428
event or development under study are commonly provided in appendixes.
Annotated charts or maps also are common in appendixes, with annotations
limited to those assisting the reader’s understanding of the analysis. Detailed
statistical data presented in tables and graphs also is common in appendixes. If
needed to support questions about the report or briefing; or, if needed for the
review process (presented later), the analyst may include worksheets employed in
the analysis. Worksheets can include Quality of Information Checks, Four Ways of
Seeing + Analyst, Assumptions and Beliefs analysis, conceptual model diagrams,
or other details of the analytic methods used in the analysis. In an intelligence
threat analysis report, appendixes should be included for creating an Intelligence
and Warning (I&W) Problem, including an Indicators Analysis and its supporting
intelligence collection plan. In a security policy analysis report, a detailed
implementation plan is appropriate in one or more appendixes. Verbal briefings
do not have appendixes, but the analyst may have additional slides available as
supporting material in case they are needed to assist in the question-and-answer
period. It is the analyst’s prerogative as to what goes into the appendixes,
provided the information supports and helps clarify the written report or verbal
briefing’s BLUF and arguments.
Guidance for Preparing Written Reports
Written reports must be precise, clear, accurate, consistent, digestible, and of a
complexity level that does not confuse the reader. The following general guidance
provides guidance on preparing written reports.
Answer the questions. Often a security analysis project will wander offtrack and fail to answer the questions asked at the start of the project. Make sure
the report is consistent from the title and BLUF through the final appendix. The
report focus must remain on the original purpose and questions. The overall
report must anticipate and answer the questions customers or audiences may 
429
have about the analysis. Thus, ensure the 5Ws + 1H questions (see Figure 8.1) are
answered clearly. Additionally, make sure there is a focus on the “what, why now,
impact so far, what next, and implications,” as appropriate, for the analysis at
hand. These are the pillars of what the written report must convey to customers
and audiences.
14
Build strong paragraphs. Every paragraph in the argument should start
with a topic sentence that contains an analytic insight or finding. Only one
analytic insight or finding should be addressed per paragraph. A second strong
sentence should provide context for the analytic insight or finding, elaborate on
the topic sentence, and bridge the topic sentence to the rest of the paragraph.15
The remaining sentences present evidence (information, data, facts) and reasons
(logic) that support the analytic insight or finding. Ensure there are logical and
easily understandable linkages between evidence and reasons that offer a smooth
and consistent flow of information. Some of the words used to link evidence and
reasons to build a good argument include:16
as
as indicated by
as shown by
assuming (that)
because
due to
follows from
for
from
given (that)
in as much as
in so far as
in view of the fact that
may be deduced
may be derived from
may be inferred from
since
the reason is that
Words to introduce findings or conclusions based on evidence and reasons
include:17
accordingly
as a result
conclude that
ergo
for these reasons
for this reason
implies that
in consequence
is evidence that
430
is reason to believe
is reason to hold
it follows that
hence
means that
so
therefore
thus
we may infer
which allows us to
infer
which entails that
which implies that
which means that
which points to
Display important evidence. Security analysis relies on qualitative or
quantitative evidence, or a combination of both. Similar to the Chapter 9
guidance on pattern-matching analyses, evidence may be presented in many
ways:18
• Direct quotations from conversations, speeches, interviews, existing
reports, articles, books, etc.
• Observations by intelligence collectors, diplomats, media personnel,
etc.
• Words representing objects, images, or events using anecdotes,
narratives, or descriptions.
• Ground-truth photographs, overhead imagery, charts, maps, videos,
voice recordings, communication intercepts, etc., representing
objects or events visually or aurally.
• Figures, tables, diagrams, graphs, boxes, charts, or maps.
• Summaries and paraphrases of any of the above.
 Use graphics widely. The old adage of “a picture is worth a thousand
words” applies directly to security analysis reports. Graphics—especially figures,
tables, diagrams, charts, maps, etc.—may be included to support the report’s
arguments or the finishing touches discussed previously. Avoid placing large
graphics in the main body of the report, as it is usually best to place them in an
appendix if they run more than a half to three-quarters of a page. Where the 
431
graphic is placed or first mentioned in the report text, a narrative description of
the graphic contents must be provided so the reader better understands the
information. Remember; however, that graphics alone do not tell the story, but
good graphics can be valuable additions.
 Do not describe the analytic process. Written reports present and support
the analytic findings of the security analysis project. Keep in mind; however, that
customers do not want a detailed description of how the findings were generated
or presented. Nor do they want to read the words “bottom-line-up-front” or the
acronym “BLUF” in the text of any report. Focus instead on presenting the insights
and findings that resulted from the critical-thinking analysis. If customers want
more details on how the analytic findings were generated, they will ask. There are
a couple of exceptions to this guidance. First, sometimes an analytic figure,
graphic, table, etc., used in reaching the findings may help the audience
understand the report. As mentioned earlier, if one large figure, graph, or table
extends to more than half to three-quarters of a page, it should be placed in an
appendix; if smaller, it may be a candidate for placement in the report’s main
body. For example, when using a matrix analysis method, such as an Analysis of
Competing Hypotheses, placing that matrix in the main body or in an appendix
may help the customer better understand the findings. Second, if the report goes
through a formal review process before publication, either by supervisors or
through a Devil’s Advocacy challenge process (detailed later), then it is
appropriate to place the worksheets from the analytic process in appendixes or in
a separate folder for reviewer reference.
Avoid logic fallacies. Use of logic fallacies can result in defective arguments
that degrade the validity of the report’s analytic findings. A logic fallacy makes
claims in reasoning or evidence that do not support a valid finding or conclusion.
Formal logical fallacies usually are easy to detect as they result from untruthful
information, obviously bad assumptions, or major flaws in reasoning. Informal 
432
logic fallacies often are more difficult to detect, but they are used widely in
societal discourse and are easily overlooked because they are so frequently used,
even by analysts. Appendix I provides a summary of frequently encountered
informal logic fallacies seen in security analysis. Analysts must ensure the linkage
of evidence and reasoning that leads to analytic findings does not commit one or
more formal or informal logic fallacies. The presence of logic fallacies reduces the
validity of the analytic findings and the veracity of the overall contentions of the
analysis.
Use proper English. Analysts must follow the grammar, spelling,
punctuation, and abbreviation guidance in their home organization’s style guide.
Word processor spelling and grammar checkers are highly recommended. Some
common English and structural writing mistakes to avoid in professional reports
include:
Use active voice. Security analysis written reports are written in the active
voice, which is when the subject of the sentence performs the action of the
sentence verb. Active voice sentences indicate the subject and verb, and
then demonstrate the action is being performed by the subject. In passive
voice, the subject is usually the receiver of the action. Examples:
Passive Voice (avoid): The World Trade Center was attacked by the
terrorists.
Active Voice (best): Terrorists attacked the World Trade Center.
Some word processors calculate the percentage of active and passive voice
in a document. Not all passive voice must be avoided as the readability of
the report may improve with an occasional sentence in passive voice; but,
make sure the main narrative of a report is primarily in the active voice.
433
Write in third person. Minimize or avoid any use of first person (I, me, we,
etc.) and second person (you, your) in security analysis reports and
briefings (except in quotes from other parties). Many reports and briefings
will be published to larger audiences where the first person or second
person makes little sense.
Eliminate contractions. It is not appropriate to use contractions in formal
writing. Spell out the words rather than employ common contractions.
Avoid expressing opinions. Do not include wording such as “In my
opinion….,” “I think….,” I believe….,” I feel….,” or other similar phrases. Not
only are such statements not in third person, but customers do not want to
hear opinions or feelings. Instead, they want analytic findings based on
solid evidence and reasoning resulting from an active and systematic
analysis. Remember: “Provide Good Analysis Not Opinions!”
Avoid rhetorical or hypothetical questions. Rhetorical questions are used
to emphasize a point in a narrative and are not expected to be answered.
For example: “Why would anyone want to study security analysis?”
Hypothetical questions usually point to important evidence or causality in
an argument; but, in effect, the evidence and or causality is wrong and has
no effect on the issue under study. For example: “Is it not clear Country Z
started the war to improve its economy?” (With no evidence to support the
claim, it is probably not clear.) The only questions in a security analysis
should be those resulting from the purpose and question elements in the
critical-thinking process. Save the rhetorical and hypothetical questions for
short stories and novels.
Avoid colloquial sayings. Colloquial sayings are words, phrases, or sayings
used in informal communications, but are not appropriate in professional 
434
or academic reports or briefings. Analysts should not write the way they
speak. For example, never write words such as “this study does not hold
water.” Instead write “this study has problems with its evidence and
reasoning.”
Avoid value-laden statements. These types of statement offer the analyst’s
subjective and often-biased perception of a situation, which could be either
good or bad. For example, avoid wording such as “the United States is the
most powerful nation on Earth, therefore….” Customers do not want to see
or hear such exaggerations supporting an argument.
Provide a readable text. Make sufficient use of main headings and subheadings throughout the report to break up the text and provide the reader
a logical outline of the report. The home organization’s style guide usually
will provide the formatting for headings. Readers prefer a layout that
includes white space. Pages should include at least two or three paragraph
starts, and each paragraph should normally contain at least three
sentences.
Document everything. Make wide use of either bibliographic in-text
citations, endnotes, footnotes, or other procedures for documenting the
sources of the analysis as called for in the home organization’s style guide
or by other supervisory guidance. In academic circles, not thoroughly
documenting sources is plagiarism. In practitioner circles, not documenting
sources is unprofessional, usually unethical; and in commercial circles,
might result in a lawsuit.
Proofread, proofread, proofread. Even when the written report is a draft be
sure to proofread and continue proofreading before and throughout the selfreview, structured self-critique, and Devil’s Advocacy challenge process discussed 
435
below. Make maximum use of word processor spelling and grammar checkers. Be
careful as some words will pass a spell check because they are spelled correctly,
but will not be correct for the context of the report. For example, the words
“border” and “boarder” will both pass a spell check, but mean far different things.
Once an analyst has worked on a written report in a digital file format for a long
time, they may overlook simple errors because they have seen and not corrected
those errors numerous times. It is useful to have a colleague not involved in the
project to proofread the report. Always print and proofread a written copy of the
report to uncover any errors not readily found in an on-screen digital file format.
Also, make at least one proofreading review where only the topic sentences of
each paragraph are read; this helps ensure the analytic findings are
understandable and consistent.
19
Guidance for Verbal Briefings
Verbal briefings offer some unique challenges. In general, all the guidance above
for written reports also applies to verbal briefings. The following is additional
guidance on preparing verbal briefings:
Murphy will be there. Murphy’s Law states “Whatever could go wrong, will
go wrong.” This applies a hundred times over to verbal briefings. For example,
most briefings consist of digital slides produced with MS PowerPoint or other
presentation software. If planning a digitally supported briefing, the analyst
should have a back-up plan if the computer or projector fails (e.g., ensure spare
equipment or spare bulbs are available), the digital file is corrupted (have paper
copies), or other electronic problems are encountered. It is always a good idea to
have paper back-ups for the main customer(s) when planning digital-supported
briefings. Paper copies also can be handed out after the briefing. If the briefing is
scheduled for 20 minutes and the customer arrives 10 minutes late, have a plan 
436
to reduce the briefing to 10 minutes. It is best to have a back-up plan for any
problems that may occur.
Give the customer a break. It is possible that the customer and audience
for a verbal briefing may not have read the corresponding written report. It is
important; therefore, to construct a verbal briefing that is informative and
persuasive and does not lose the customer and audience. There is an adage that
the best briefings will “tell them what you are going to tell them (the BLUF), then
tell them (the argument), and then tell them what you told them (the BLUF
again).” This is good advice for most verbal briefings, especially because after five
to seven minutes, the attention of listeners may start to wane. Do not use slides
that contain dense narratives. Use a “bullet” (short statement) format for key
findings, evidence, and reasoning; the presenter can then fill in the details with
their actual briefing. Use of photographs and graphics are strongly recommended,
but select such material only if it directly supports evidence and reasoning in the
briefing. Keep graphics professional; i.e., do not use more than three colors, avoid
moving characters, and eliminate complex graphics. Make sure digital briefing
slides are readable in the back of the room. Spend no more than three-quarters of
the time allotted delivering the verbal briefing so there is time for a question-andanswer (Q&A) period. It is best not to go over the allotted time for the briefing.
Time may be exceeded to extend the Q&A period provided the customer and
audience agree. Remember: The goal is to inform and persuade the customer and
audience and to do so in a clear, precise, and accurate manner.
Practice. practice, practice. Do not assume the verbal briefing will fill the
time available. Practice the briefing and time the sessions to make sure it can be
completed in the allotted time. Most busy customers do not appreciate briefings
running over. Video record the initial practice sessions and also have colleagues
listen to live verbal briefing practices and request they make comments on how it
may be improved. When colleagues and immediate supervisors provide critical 
437
feedback on a briefing, it often is referred to in government and military circles as
a “murder board.” Remember the 5 P’s: Prior Planning Prevents Poor
Performance!
Reviewing the Report or Briefing
Review and critique of a written report or verbal briefing is critical to its quality
and effectiveness. In the active and systematic process of critical thinking, there
are a number of checks on the quality of the actual analysis; they include
assessing the quality of information, investigating potential deception, assessing
points of view and assumptions, generating conceptual models, using analytic
methods to reach findings, and generating implications and consequences of the
findings. However, the initial draft of written reports and verbal briefings still
requires the analyst (or analytic team) and supervisors to conduct a robust review
and critique. Feedback from colleagues and supervisors is important.
In this book, a three-part review and critique process is recommended.
First, complete a deep, structured self-critique focusing on the veracity of the
analytic findings. Second, the drafts of written reports and verbal briefings
undergo a critical self-review. Third, intelligence-related written reports may be
submitted to a challenge analysis Devil’s Advocacy process. A Devil’s Advocacy
challenge analysis seeks to refute the report’s findings through a review of the
analytic process and by attempting to use the same evidence to reach different
findings.20 Such a process also is recommended for security policy analysis
reports. After the Devil’s Advocacy process is complete, the written report can be
published. This process mainly applies to strategic or operational reports without
sensitive time limits for report submission. Time-sensitive, current event or
tactical reports and briefings likely will only undergo the analyst’s (or analytic
team’s) structured self-critique, self-review, and a supervisory review before
publishing.
438
Start the review with an assessment of the draft report or briefing’s analytic
findings through a structured self-critique. This is a deep review of the analytic
process used to reach the findings, because it is better to identify why the
findings are wrong before the report is published or briefing given than to have to
later explain why it was wrong.21 It may take only a couple of hours to conduct a
structured self-critique and identify problems early, or it could take days or weeks
to later explain to angry customers why the analysis was wrong.
In a structured self-critique, the analyst goes back through the entire
analysis and examines the analytic process to see what factors might lead to the
analytic findings being wrong. Figure 11.4 provides a list of the key questions
analysts must consider to help avoid errors.
22 As a result of the structured selfcritique, the analyst may need to revisit each of the critical-thinking elements
used to reach the analytic findings and make revisions to the latest draft.
Figure 11.4 Structured Self-Critique Key Questions23
What if my main conclusion or key judgment turns out to be wrong?
 How reliable was the key evidence?
 Were there significant information gaps?
 What should the absence of information indicate?
 Was contradictory evidence ignored? If so, why?
 Was past or emerging contexts ignored?
 Did deception go undetected?
 Were assumptions and beliefs critically evaluated and deemed valid?
 Was a broad range of diverse perspectives solicited?
 Were alternative explanations or hypotheses considered?
 Were both agency and structural factors considered?
 Was a critical-thinking framework followed?
 Were common analytic pitfalls avoided?

The latest draft of the written report or verbal briefing should then
undergo a self-review of its critical-thinking Intellectual Standards,
24 detailed in 
439
Figure 11.5. The Intellectual Standards check on the quality of the critical thinking
used in the analysis and the quality of the draft written report or verbal briefing.
Both the entire draft and each major analytic finding should be examined through
the Intellectual Standards checklist. Depending on the type of report or briefing,
other standards the analyst may consider include whether the critical thinking
and draft report or briefing are reasonable, consistent, falsifiable, testable, well
organized, authenticated, effective, and/or factual.
25 As a result of the self-review,
the analyst may find a need to revisit the elements of thought used to reach the
analytic findings and make revisions to the draft.

Figure 11.5 Checklist for Intellectual Standards Assessing Critical Thinking26

 _____Clarity
 Could you elaborate?
 Could you illustrate what you mean?
 Could you give me an example?
 _____Accuracy
 How could we check on that?
 How could we find out if that is true?
 How could we verify or test that?
 _____Precision
 Could you be more specific?
 Could you give me more details?
 Could you be more exact?
 _____Relevance
 How does that relate to the problem?
 How does that relate to the question?
 How does that help us with the issue?
 _____Depth
 What factors make this difficult?
440
 What are some of the complexities of this question?
 What are some of the difficulties we need to deal with?
 _____Breadth
 Do we need to look at this from another perspective?
 Do we need to consider another point of view?
 Do we need to look at this in other ways?
 _____Logic
 Does all of this make sense together?
 Does your first paragraph fit in with your last one?
 Does what you say follow from the evidence?
 _____Significance
 Is this the most important problem to consider?
 Is this the central idea to focus on?
 Which of these facts are most important?
 _____Fairness
 Is my thinking justifiable in context?
 Am I taking into account the thinking of others?
 Is my purpose fair given the situation?
 Are concepts clear?
 Am I distorting concepts to get what I want?

Once the self-review using the Intellectual Standards is completed and
appropriate revisions made, the analyst should feel confident in placing the
revised draft of written reports into the challenge analysis process. At this point,
the analyst can provide the draft to their supervisors and/or the home
organization’s Devil’s Advocacy process. This structure may be a comprehensive
supervisory review or a more formal Devil’s Advocacy process managed by a
separate office or staff. Verbal briefings usually are reviewed only by supervisors
and do not normally undergo challenge analysis. In the IC, challenge analyses seek 
441
to refute the report’s findings through a review of the analytic process and by
attempting to use the same evidence to reach different findings. It also includes
the analytic standards published by ODNI in Intelligence Community Directive
(ICD) 203,
27 which also pertains to security policy analysis reports and should be
used as appropriate. Figure 11.6 summarizes the ICD 203 requirements.
Upon completion of the structured self-critique, self-review with the
Intellectual Standards, and the Devil’s Advocacy challenge process, a written
report should be ready for publication. Verbal briefings also will be ready for
delivery upon completing any “murder boards” and supervisory reviews. This is
the culmination of a security analysis project. The analyst will have taken their
project from the critical-thinking purpose and question elements through each
critical-thinking element leading to the final written report and/or verbal briefing.
The critical-thinking elements require a more robust process of thinking and
analysis than what most new analysts or academic students have experienced in
the past. The more the analyst uses this analytic process, the more proficient they
will become.
Figure 11.6 Checklist for ICD 203 Analytic Standards28
 _____Analysts must perform their work with objectivity and with awareness of
their own assumptions and reasoning.
 _____Analytic assessments must not be distorted by, nor shaped for, advocacy
of a particular audience, agenda, or policy viewpoint.
 _____Analysis should be informed by all relevant information available.
 _____Analysis must exhibit analytic tradecraft standards, specifically:
442
 _____Properly describe quality and credibility of underlying sources, data,
and methodologies.
 _____Properly express and explain uncertainties associate with major
analytic findings.
 _____Properly distinguish between underlying information and analysts’
assumptions and judgments.
 _____Incorporate analysis of alternatives.
 _____Demonstrate customer relevance and addresses implications and
consequences.
 _____Use clear and logical argumentation.
 _____Explain change to or consistency with past analytic judgments.
_____Makes accurate judgments and assessments.
 _____Incorporates effective visual information where appropriate.
_____Analysis must be disseminated in a timely manner to be actionable by
customers.
Key Concepts
Analytic Findings
Appendixes
Argument
Argument Map
BLUF
Challenge Analysis
Confidence Levels
Consequences
Contention
Devil’s Advocacy
Evidence
Executive Summary
Finishing Touches
Implications
Intellectual Standards
Likelihood
Logic Fallacies
Objections
Outlook
Rebuttals
Reasons
Structured Self-Critique
443
Title
Uncertainty
Verbal Briefings
Written Reports
Discussion Points
1. Why are the general humanities and scientific method writing approaches not
appropriate for writing security analysis intelligence or policy reports?
2. Why is the bottom-line-up-front (BLUF) approach used for security analysis
written reports and verbal briefings?
3. Why must argument objections and rebuttals be included in security analysis
written reports and verbal briefings?
4. Select your last analytic paper and compare it to the material in this chapter.
What did you do right and what did you do wrong in preparing this paper?
5. Compare and contrast the review process you used in the past to the
techniques covered in this chapter for structured self-critique, self-review, and
Devil’s Advocacy. How will you review your reports and briefings in the future?
Notes
1 Louis M. Kaiser and Randolph H. Pherson, Analytic Writing Guide (Reston, VA: Pherson
Associates, LLC, 2014), 21.
2 Katherine Hibbs Pherson and Randolph H. Pherson, Critical Thinking for Strategic Intelligence,
2nd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE/CQ Press, 2017), 248-249.
3 Ibid, 251.
4 Eugene Bardach and Eric M. Patashnik, A Practical Guide for Policy Analysis, The Eightfold Path
to More Effective Problem Solving, 5th ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE/CQ Press, 2016), 78.
5 U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Reports and Testimonies,”
https://www.gao.gov/browse/topic (accessed August 3, 2018).
6 Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, “Areas of Research,”
https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/research/ (accessed August 3, 2018).
444
7 Daniel R. Coats, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community
(Washington DC: Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 2018),
https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Newsroom/Testimonies/2018-ATA---UnclassifiedSSCI.pdf (accessed July 23, 2018).
8 Kaiser and Pherson, 22.
9 Modified from Kaiser and Pherson, 23.
10 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, “Intelligence Community Directive 203 Analytic
Standards,” (Washington, DC: Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 2015), 3
https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICD/ICD%20203%20Analytic%20Standards.pdf (accessed
July 20, 2018).
11 Ibid.
12 Reprinted with U.S. government permission in Pherson and Pherson, 220.
13 Kaiser and Pherson, 57-58
14 Ibid, 13-20.
15 Ibid, 39.
16 Noel Hendrickson et al., The Rowman and Littlefield Handbook for Critical Thinking (Lanham,
MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2008), 13.
17 Ibid, 13-14.
18 Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G, Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams, The Craft of Research, 2nd ed.
(Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2003), 144-145.
19 Kaiser and Pherson, 71.
20 See discussion in Morgan D. Jones, The Thinker’s Toolkit, 14 Powerful Techniques for Problem
Solving, rev. ed. (New York, NY: Three Rivers Press, 1998), 217-220. Detailed procedures for
several challenge analysis techniques are found in Richard J. Heuer, Jr. and Randolph H.
Pherson, Structured Analytic Techniques for Intelligence Analysis, 2nd ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE/CQ Press, 2015), 233-272.
21 Pherson and Pherson, 196-199.
22 Figure modified from Pherson and Pherson, 198-199. The structured self-critique technique is
defined in more detail in Heuer and Pherson, 245-249.
23 Ibid.
24 Richard Paul and Linda Elder, Critical Thinking, Tools for Taking Charge of Your Professional
and Personal Life, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc., 2014), 127-166.
25 Gerald M. Nosich, Learning to Think Things Through, A Guide to Critical Thinking Across the
Curriculum, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2011).
26 Paul and Elder, 141-142.
445
27 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 2-5.
28 Ibid.